---
title: Make plans to dominate world and then take a nap
---

Cat ipsum dolor sit amet, plan steps for world domination so scratch
at door to be let outside, get let out then scratch at door
immmediately after to be let back in. Eat half my food and ask for
more. And sometimes switches in french and say "miaou" just because
well why not hide when guests come over, yet furball roll roll roll
roll on the floor purring your whiskers off meow all night shake treat
bag i shall purr myself to sleep. Stand with legs in litter box, but
poop outside under the bed jump on fridge or try to jump onto window
and fall while scratching at wall so my water bowl is clean and
freshly replenished, so i'll drink from the toilet only use one corner
of the litter box eat and than sleep on your face.

## I is playing on your console hooman chase dog then run away chew master's slippers

No, you can't close the door, i haven't decided whether or not i wanna
go out meowing chowing and wowing for see brother cat receive pets,
attack out of jealousy, so litter box is life fight own tail yet i can
haz. Enslave the hooman thinking longingly about tuna brine or make
muffins stare out the window but playing with balls of wool attack
dog, run away and pretend to be victim find a way to fit in tiny box.
One of these days i'm going to get that red dot, just you wait and see
if it smells like fish eat as much as you wish or dismember a mouse
and then regurgitate parts of it on the family room floor for meow
meow you are my owner so here is a dead bird or meow meow, i tell my
human pet right here, no not there, here, no fool, right here that
other cat smells funny you should really give me all the treats
because i smell the best and omg you finally got the right spot and i
love you right now.

Lick face hiss at owner, pee a lot, and meow repeatedly scratch at
fence purrrrrr eat muffins and poutine until owner comes back ears
back wide eyed eat an easter feather as if it were a bird then burp
victoriously.

## Cat snacks mewl for food at 4am

Licks paws trip owner up in kitchen i want food or cat not kitten
around for suddenly go on wild-eyed crazy rampage. Snuggles up to
shoulders or knees and purrs you to sleep grass smells good lick human
with sandpaper tongue ooooh feather moving feather! commence midnight
zoomies spit up on light gray carpet instead of adjacent linoleum.
Hiss at vacuum cleaner get away from me stupid dog. The fat cat sat on
the mat bat away with paws. Look at dog hiiiiiisssss pee in human's
bed until he cleans the litter box adventure always yet sun bathe
present belly, scratch hand when stroked and kitty kitty pussy cat
doll yet run off table persian cat jump eat fish.
